# Headspace

## What Is It?

Different people have different perspectives on what a headspace is, but its generally considered to be **a place within or connecting to one's mind** that interacts with plurality in interesting and often useful ways.

From a strict psychological-only perspective, the headspace (also known as a wonderland, inner world, or mind palace) is a thought construct of a location of some kind that has been imagined repeatedly until it is very easy to recall. This construct may be consciously or unconsciously generated by the system.
For systems with spiritual or metaphysical components, this place can also be experienced as an external or partially external/'real' space the system is connected to governed by very different rules unique to that system.

You can think of it like very visualization-heavy and in-depth internal communication where instead of passing thoughts back and forth that are 'verbal' sentences, the thought is instead a full sensory experience of being in a place.

Many systems have to intentionally create their headspace before being able to use it, but plenty also have a self-generating headspace or have system members who already gave it form consciously or subconsciously.

It is worth noting that singlets may also have an inner world if they desire.


## Why Is It Useful?

A headspace is useful for aiding in:
- Better communication by affording more in-depth visualization of headmates and system phenomena.
- Switching through intensive visualization.
- Memory recall and lowering dissociative barriers between headmates.
- Co-consciousness by visualizing where headmates who are not fronting are and giving them something to do when not fronting.
- Processing trauma and other mental stressors through metaphor.
- Meditation focus and daydream escape to improve mood.
- Creative outlet to build things in collaboratively.

There are also reasons not to utilize a headspace to keep in mind:
- If you have to make one from scratch it can be hard work that you may not have time and energy for.
- If the level of immersion you may expect from it is not worth the amount of work for you.
- If you have headmates that behave in maldaptive or antagonistic ways, they may be able to utilize the headspace as a new tool to enact harmful behavior.
- If you don't want to create one, for whatever reason.

Its up to you if its worth working for or not. We want to be clear- **any skill you can work on with a headspace you can work on without it**, it just might be more difficult.


## Clearing Misconceptions

This is is one of the system experiences people have the most misconceptions about.

One of the biggest incorrect assumptions people have is the idea that one's headspace is always 1:1 with reality and going to it therefore feels like literally being transported to another world that is as tangible, immersive, and detailed as real life.

In actuality; **The headspace is essentially a multiplayer daydream**. This means that its going to be about the same level of intensity and immersion as any of your other daydreams for most people. Higher immersion and detail can be learned, and some systems have more unusual experiences, but it is very much not the average experience.

It is very much standard to not be fully all 5-senses immersed to the point you lose touch with whats happening to your meatspace body.

Related to this, there is also the misconception that there is something wrong if you cannot recall what you were doing in headspace if the front was not paying attention to it. This is very standard actually. While some systems appear to be able to make memory while not utilizing the front, this is not common.

From a scientific-only perspective, **true multitasking is not possible; you cannot simultaneously think of two things at once**, only flick between different things rapidly. So what is actually happening here for these systems, from a scientific perspective, is more likely either retroactive memories that are generated when they return to front and recall them or dissociation preventing the fronting party from perceiving the share of the brain's attention that is going to what that headmate is thinking and doing.

One can then in this vein think of the internal thought stream like a resource that must be shared to think and make memory. The headspace has to run in this same resource, which is why the attention of the front is important to remembering what you have done in it.

Newbies often think the headspace is a 'real place' that is very solid for all systems that they go when not fronting and can remember it all perfectly and get panicked when they are not having that experience. This is very much not true.

Its also commonly assumed that everyone has and needs a headspace. Not true! **Many systems have to make a headspace to have one, or choose to never have a headspace**. You do not need any sort of headspace -not even a featureless void- if you do not want one. A headspace can be helpful, yes, but its not for everyone. You can also make and have as many headspaces as you want at once and they can change radically over time.


## Accessing Headspace:

If you know you already have a headspace the process is fairly simple; **get daydreaming and hold the daydream thought construct lightly enough so that the rest of your system can play with it too.**

That is, you get comfortable and then imagine the space in vivid detail. Then you imagine yourself a body in there while holding this daydream gently enough that your headmates can add to it as well.

It may also be helpful to visualize a connecting process (such as imagining opening a door, or a loading screen or whatever feels appropriately symbolic for you) or get into a meditative state in order to facilitate better immersion.

Some systems can also have luck asking a headmate to bring them in as part of the process.


## Baby's First Headspace

As previously stated several times, your headspace is essentially a fancy daydream.

You create it much the same way you do any very detailed daydream you keep coming back to- you imagine it over and over in detail until its easy to call up quickly.

A good place to start in this fashion is very simply. Start small with something like a single table/couch/bench- maybe even just a floor or a black void if you find that too much. Anything that feels right for you. A spot a couple people can hang out and interact. Imagine it vividly over and over -its look, what it feels like when touched, etc- until you can call up the mental image of it pretty readily. Now imagine yourself alongside the object, possibly interacting with it if you like (ex- sitting down on the couch) and invite your headmates to play with this space too.

Treat it like you do standard communication, when you listen for their turn playing with it, you hold the thought gently. If it feels like the thought is changing on you in a deliberate way, then this might be a headmate. Let it happen and see what occurs.

You may also need to forcibly imagine your headmate in this space too and then let them take control of their body-construct you made them.

If it worked and you had a conversation in that space, congrats! You have a headspace now. From here you can work to build the space however you want and make it more vivid if desired.

## Inner World Building

If you already have a headspace you can access, but you want to change aspects of it, that is very possible for many systems.

Generally speaking, you change it by imagining it differently in heavy detail over and over until it 'sticks', though systems with more real-feeling headspaces (such as many of those with heavy spiritual elements) may need to build and change it manually once you have accessed it, rather than just imagining it differently.

Start small and basic as building more complex things and keeping them can be a lot of work. You can make things more complex over time.

This may also be complicated if only some headmates may alter the headspace, or if the headspace itself is conscious enough to resist changes. In this case, you will need to find who is responsible and either ask permission to be able to change it, or ask for them to change it directly.

If multiple members of your system can front, having different system members working on the headspace while in front is a good idea. This can help reinforce the headspace and make it easier to access for everyone.

It is also a good idea to consult as much of the system as possible before changing anything major, as its something that effects everyone.

### Idea Help

The sky is the limit for one's headspace- it can be quite literally anything you can imagine.

However if you would like some ideas for things to put in it, here are a few;
- Utility spaces or objects
	-  Place to do switching visualization in/fronting room
	-  Place that people can pay attention to/communicate with front from
	-  Object to interact with to enter/exit the headspace
	-  Place where new headmates come from
	-  Place where memories are stored/objects that symbolize memories
	-  Space dedicated to other visualization exercises
	-  Place to meet and socialize as a group
- Individual spaces that each headmate can customize to their liking/that are 'for' each headmate
-  A space that feels comforting and safe to some or all of the system to calm down in.

Useful things to worldbuild and visualize in general:
- Build it in a game (like minecraft, the sims, vrchat, etc)
- Use fantasy mapmaking tools (such as ones intended for ttrpgs)
- Look at and study archetecture and home design (or alternatively natural world scenery)
- Write descriptions of it down or draw them freehand

## Debugging:

Here are some common problems that may arise regarding headspaces;

**"I can't change my inner world no matter what I do!"**
If you've tried everything previously mentioned in this guide, you have a few options on what to do next.

You can make a new headspace from scratch other than the one you are currently working with, try to find the root cause of why your headspace is like that by digging around, wait until you are more experienced in system matters and have improved your skills more, or you can just accept that it is what it is.

Please note that by digging around you may unearth forgotten memories or less well adjusted headmates that you may not be ready to face yet. Please exercise caution if you are going to go digging for answers.

Most systems can eventually learn to tweak a headspace to some level if they have one, but you may be experiencing an exception, and thats ok too.

**"We can't agree on how the inner world should look!"**
If you cannot agree on how the inner world should look, you can always make multiple separate ones, or make the inner world cycle through all of your system's preferences.

**"The inner world changed suddenly/I suddenly cannot access it!"**
System skills can wax and wane over time- it just happens on occasion. Did something major happen recently? Major life events -both positive and negative- can cause changes in your abilities.

If this is the case, then you will generally have to just wait it out. this can go faster if you try to remove or reduce the stressors that are likely causing it.

Try exercises that are not terribly intensive in the meantime.

Its also possible someone shut you out. Did you get into a fight with a headmate recently? Try talking to your headmates if possible to see if they know anything.

**"I know the system has a headspace but I cannot access it, how?"**
Are you *SURE* that there is an inner world already? Its possible that is the problem.

If you can communicate with your headmates, try talking to them and see if they know what is the matter. Its also possible that whoever controls the headspace does not know you exist, or doesn't want to invite you yet for whatever reason.

If you cannot access the headspace, remember you can also just make another and invite others to join you.

**"No matter what I do I can't make a headspace, nor can anyone else in here!"**

Have you looked into aphantasia? A 'text only' or 'audio only' headspace is also possible if you cannot conjure images. If even that is not possible even with effort, you might just have to throw in the towel.

Its rare, but sometimes some systems just can't make progress with some things. If you've tried everything and kept at it with little to no changes for a considerable length of time trying to train for it (over a year), you may just have to accept its not happening for you and you aren't getting returns for your effort.

Having a headspace and/or being able to access the headspace that your system uses is not the end all be all of system experience. It is ok to not have what is considered a more 'typical' experience of having one, and if you cannot do it, then you should probably make peace with it.


## External Guides:
- [Small Worlds, Contained Inside-Visualization Guide](https://healthymultiplicity.com/loonybrain/Info/Small%20Worlds%20Contained%20Inside.html)
- [Let’s Talk: Headspaces](https://web.archive.org/web/20230517020657/https://what-remains-of-wren.tumblr.com/post/660578239231721472/so-lets-talk-about-headspaces-i-see-a-lot-of)
- [On Building Headspace](https://lb-lee.dreamwidth.org/763283.html)
- [Headspace Discovery and Defense](https://lb-lee.dreamwidth.org/1049746.html#cutid1)
- [The Tulpanomicon](https://tulpanomicon.guide/tulpanomicon.pdf) (Check Wonderlands Section)




